# Marx’s Top Mistakes in his Economic Theories


1. **Scarcity comes from class conflict and not nature.** Marx’s primitive communism and ideas he got from Rousseau puts across the idea that nature is abundant, peaceful and protective. If there is scarcity in a society, it must be because certain classes and the institutions behind them, make it that way. This seems to be a key concept in his conflict theory and even Marxists today believe that scarcity has been solved and any scarcity is an injustice.
2. **Marx frowns on Adam Smith’s division of labour.** While Marx admits that division of labour helps an economy, he points out that it hurts society by alienating the workers in it while also making work tasks simple and repetitive. Marx’s theories therefore, ignores specialisation of workers, skilled labour and the scarcity of those skilled labourers. This attitude, steers Marx away from obvious concepts in a Capitalist economy, such as the Capitalists competing for scarce skilled workers or scarce highly experienced workers. Marxists today believe that the market is simply workers competing for the lowest wage.
3. **Ignores the origins of innovations.** Division of labour focuses on breaking up parts of a complicated process into simple parts. Smith gave examples of innovations that improve production once those parts have been broken down and people “focused their whole minds” on innovating them. The concept of innovation is very much absent from Marx’s work and he does not identify man’s reason as the force behind innovation. Instead of the ability to reason, Marx identifies the opposible thumb as the thing that would lift mankind above the rest of the animal world. Marxists today see all highly intellectual work and manual work as just labour. There is also disagreement between Marxists that the variable capital in the labour theory of value is meant for unskilled labour or all labour.
4. **Ignores entrepreneurs.** The division of labour also applies to people’s professions and needs in markets. Marx ignores how entrepreneurs identify needs and opportunities in the market that as a result, create companies that hire workers. Marx would rather believe that companies are more likely to consolidated into monopolies than be created. Marxists today have no ability to conceive the value entrepreneurs bring to a market.
5. **Ignores talent.** While things like the Pareto Principle or Price’s Law came after Marx, he disregards the notion that some people can be more productive than other at the same task. Marx does not have the concept that some individuals can contribute more than others and his theories are generally more collectivist than individualist. Scarce talent is another way for labourers to demand higher wages. Marxists today find it difficult to conceive that there can be more talent in individuals and see the results of endeavours as the result of a collective effort. For example, Olympic atheletes have teams of people helping them that they rely on to win, but those atheletes are still the ones that represent the team and are the talent behind it all. 
6. **Contradictions as a Philosophy.** Marx’s theories are at their core, based on ‘contradictions’ found in the dialectical process - which violates Aristotle's law of noncontradition. Here are some of the top contradictions in his theories: 
* Workers are both the most profitable component for a company and at the same time, the most expensive.
* Surplus value somehow goes up while prices go down due to competition
* Everything is labour even if its incredibly different like a scientist inventing a machine and an unskilled labourer digging a hole. 
* We've had over 20,000 years of labour with no real wealth, but labour is the only reason we have so much wealth now.
* Multiplying by 'infinity' to the C part of LTV in order to achieve the communism stage of society.
* Capitalists need to spend all their money on capital investments to be able to concentrate all money in society.
* Capitalists are after more surplus value and at the same time, displace and ultimately destroy the source of surplus value.
* A labourer's wages is just a previous labourer's labour time
* Marxists: "Marx is very complicated, nuanced and most people get him wrong".  
   Also Marxists: "With only a single forumla with 3 variables, you can understand the infinite complexity of an infinite number of economies"
7. **Exchange is a Zero-Sum Game.** While Marx believed that individual people can gain increased use-value in exchanging goods, he does not believe (nor did Ricardo) that there is an in increase exchange-value from the trade. In other words, you cannot profit from the exchange. Whereas if the economic value of the commodity is tied to its use or utility, then an exchange in itself does create economic value and therefore economic growth. Marxists today and a lot of other people believe that Capitalism needs resources to grow and as a result, it will strip the planet of all resources for the economic system to keep functioning.
8. **Doesn't apply to service sector.** Marx didn’t see services as productive labour as they did not produce commodities.  All 1st world economies have over 80% of their workforce employed in the service sector. Examples are nurses, teachers and actors. Marxists today are divided on this and they can shift and change their minds in the same conversation in an attempt to align as many workers (manufactoring and services) with their class. 
9. **Ignores risk in markets.** Marx did not consider possibilities of commodity products not being sold, delayed in payments, capital investments being written off, businesses not working out and in general, the concept of risk being taken on by business owners. Taking on risk by the business owner and away from the workers, reduces the claim of exploitation. For example, if a company manufactures a product which is then sold on to a wholesaler who will only pays for those products 90 days later, the Capitalist takes on risk in their commitment to pay the workers a wage at the end of each month and as a result, can take a percentage of the profits without exploiting the workers (Time preference). 
10. **Ignores the flow of trade.** In Wealth of Nations, Smith stressed the ease of trade as an underpinning for the division of labour coming about. Specifically, he mentioned money and institutions that increase the speed and ease of trade. The speed and easy of trade and the ‘flow of production’ have an exponential network effect which is what Smith considered to be the real wealth of a nation. Marx’s theories do somewhat acknowledge these points, but would like to abolish those institutions - certainly money - and centralise and collectivise these functions in the dictatorship of the proletariat and the communism stage.
11. **C / V and LTRPF** - The ratio of constant capital to variable capital does not tend to tilt to the constant capital side . There have been studies that prove that across industries and economies, companies biggest expense is wages and not machines. This could be to do with companies trying to innovate and expand into new fields, products and services over time to diversify and decommodify their offering which requires hiring new workers. 
12. **Workers can own shares** and use their wages to make capital investments, such as in the case of saving for their retirements. Marx expected workers to only hover around subsistence wages and most Marxists today do not appreciate that workers can "own the means of production" in this way and even have decision making abilities as shareholders.
13. **Ignores human life.** Marx was smart enough to know that his ideas would lead to mass violence, death and destruction - Engles confirmed it after his death. This could be to do with his dehumanising concept of false consciousness or dehumanising people as part of the old super structure that needs to be moved out of the way. As Albert Camus said “The welfare of the people in particular has always been the alibi of tyrants, and it provides the further advantage of giving the servants of tyranny a good conscience”. Marxists today - in particular ones from upper class backgrounds - often dehumanise people, have no issues to jump to violence or threaten violence to those they see as they class enemy and are quite confident that everything will be better once the violent revolution will happen and overthrow Capitalism. As Aldous Huxley said “The surest way to work up a crusade in favor of some good cause is to promise people they will have a chance of maltreating someone. To be able to destroy with good conscience, to be able to behave badly and call your bad behavior 'righteous indignation' — this is the height of psychological luxury, the most delicious of moral treats.”
